Good day. I'm Norman Wildberger. Last time in
this series on foundational issues in mathematics,
we exposed a really major problem with the notion
of function in its use in modern mathematics. We
are going to have to rethink how we think about
functions, and today I want to talk a little bit
philosophically or meta-mathematically about
the right orientation to have towards not just
functions but also towards mathematics in
general. This is an issue that's going to
touch on different issues within mathematics.
I'd like to frame the discussion in terms of
a dichotomy between closed concepts and open
concepts. I want to explain what I mean by that,
and the guiding idea for us today is that
mathematics itself is an open system.
So, to introduce this idea of this division
between things, let's talk about a kind of
physical or geographical analogy. So, here's
our planet Earth, an artist's representation.
Here's Australia, the equator, planet Earth, a
round sphere sitting inside space. And here's
an alternate kind of possible view of this
situation, where we also have Australia here
but now imagined as part of a Flat Earth. Okay,
this is a non-existent world, but if you were
a primitive person, say 200,000 years ago, and
you were placed in the middle of Australia, then
you would not initially know whether you're in a
situation like this or in a situation like this.
So, let's imagine that we went back in time,
and some primitive peoples were placed in the
middle of Australia, and we start exploring
our landscape. After a few generations,
we would start increasing the range of
our explorations, our range of familiar
territory. After some thousands of years,
perhaps we might eventually expand to realize
that Australia was a continent; there were
oceans around. Then, thousands of years later,
we would eventually come to the realization
that we were actually on a round planet and
that the total amount of land and sea in this
picture was ultimately finite. It was contained;
it was a closed system. In other words,
the world that we actually live in.
But another possible scenario is that we imagine
initially that we are sort of on a flat earth,
and perhaps it might be that as we explore
further and further, this planar aspect of the
world we live in simply extends. So, I want you
to conduct a thought experiment: imagine yourself
in an alternate universe where planet Earth is
not a round sphere like this but rather a plane,
a flat more or less plane that extends or
appears to extend in all directions. So,
as we go outwards, we simply discover more and
more lands, more and more continents, more and
more oceans. It'll be hard for us to determine
that this process extends infinitely because we
don't have a bird's-eye view of the whole thing.
What we have is increasing diameters of knowledge,
and no matter how far we extend our knowledge in
this generation, the possibility exists that in
the next generation, people will go further
and discover more about this kind of world.
So, this is an imagined world in
which there are no boundaries,
in which there's at least a potential for
continued expansion, where we never have a
final understanding of the world in which we
live. Okay, so these two pictures are quite
different psychologically. We live in this kind
of world; it's finite, it's closed. We understand,
in theory, pretty well everything about it
geographically. In this picture, it's open,
it's unbounded, it's infinite, or perhaps
potentially infinite. We're not really sure,
and there's always the possibility
of increasing our understanding.
This distinction between closed and open is
a meta-mathematical idea. It's not actually
within mathematics itself, so we're not
being completely precise. But let's say
that closed roughly means that it's finite,
or that it's bounded, that it's enclosing,
that it can potentially be fully understood. While
open suggests to us something that's infinite,
something that's unbounded, keeps going,
you can't fence it in. With an open system,
it's never possible to fully understand it;
our understanding is always partial. And again,
let me emphasize that, in my opinion,
mathematics is more like an open system.
So, let's have a look at some of these key
examples: concepts of number, function,
and sequence. From my point of view, these
are concepts which are really meta-concepts;
they are things that we impose on mathematics
from the outside. But from the inside,
we have to treat them in a different way. So,
I want to suggest that mathematical definitions
need to respect this open aspect of the subject.
So, for example, let's look at the idea of a
number. I claim that there's no such concept
within mathematics proper. The idea of a
number as something that counts something
is a meta-mathematical idea. We can frame that in
the English language that surrounds mathematics,
but it's very hard—in fact, I say impossible—to
define the notion of a general number within
mathematics itself. So, in the standard view, you
might be able to define what you mean by a number
once and for all, and then different kinds of
numbers that you study are simply special cases
of this more general definition that you've
already made. Another point of view, the open
point of view, is to think of number as not a
concept at all within mathematics. So, it's a
meta-mathematical concept. So, I put it in quotes,
and now what we do is we think of natural numbers,
we think of defining objects called fractions,
integers, rational numbers. So, we think of the
concept of number in quotes as something that's
open, that keeps on going, there's no bound. So,
we, for example, in our definitions may get to
a certain stage, but in the next generation,
someone who's smarter, who thinks more about these
things, will be able to go further. But nobody
will ever get to the end of the notion of number;
there will always be a better way of thinking,
a more embracing way of thinking, a more
general way of thinking. The system is open.
Okay, this is a mental image that I want
you to have. It's not a precise thing;
it's just an idea that mathematics is going
on beyond our view. So, we saw in our last
few videos that there are serious problems
with the notion of function, and here is
my suggestion on how we should overcome that,
or how we should think about functions within
mathematics. We should realize that there is no
such concept as a function, a general function,
within mathematics proper, but there are
many types of mathematical objects which act
as functions. The usual idea is that it does
make sense to talk about what a function is,
and then one simply inside this box of functions
carves out particular types of functions.
Here is the preferred way of thinking about
things. We do not talk about a general function,
but rather what we do is we define different
kinds of objects which effectively are
specialized types of functions. So, we
can talk about—we haven't done this,
but eventually we will—we can talk about constant
functions, we can talk about linear functions,
we can talk about continuous functions. We can
define these as types of mathematical objects
which are very concretely specified. But there's
no limit to this notion; there will always be
further examples of functions, further extensions
of this basic idea. Again, an open system. So,
it's a very important distinction between thinking
about a closed system and an open system, and most
key concepts in mathematics are open. They're
like this notion of function. In particular,
the important idea of a sequence, which
we will also eventually talk about,
is exactly the same as like a number and
function. It also is an open concept.
All right, so that's very good. Since
we're now on a sort of philosophical
or meta-mathematical trend here, next time
I'm going to continue and talk a little bit
about definitions and specifications and
the interpretation of definitions within
mathematics. I hope you'll join me for that.
I'm Norman Wildberger. Thanks for listening.